CONFIG.md, before:

-*- fill-column: 100 -*-

# Factory provisioning

## Individual factory provisioning

In "individual factory provisioning mode" the SnappySense device is brought up in "access point
mode" (AP mode) as described in [../firmware-arduino/MANUAL.md](../firmware-arduino/MANUAL.md),
offering a WiFi access point with a name advertised on its screen (the AP name is generated randomly
if none has been cconfigured).  The screen will also show an IP address.

### Factory config query

To query the device configuration, run

```
   curl http://192.168.a.b/show
```

Passwords are represented by their first letter and certificates by their first line.

### Factory config update

To configure the device, run

```
   curl -i --data-binary @snp_x_y_no_z.cfg http://192.168.a.b/config
```

where `snp_x_y_no_z.cfg` is the name of the configuration file for the device whose name is
`snp_x_y_no_z`, see `aws-iot-backend/README.md`, and `192.168.a.b` is the IP address printed on the
device screen.

The `-i` argument to `curl` ensures that the server response is shown.  For a successful upload, the
response is a 200 header.  Otherwise it is a 405 header with an error message pinpointing the
problem.  An error message will also be shown on the device screen.

To check that the device has been configured properly you can also use the `/show` command as
outlined above while still connected to the AP.

### Config syntax

The syntax of the config file is as follows.  (An example configuration file is also in
`firmware-arduino/src/configuration_template.txt`, and it will be useful to read
`aws-iot-backend/README.md` about how to obtain the device identity and certficiates.)

The config file has a line-oriented syntax.  Blank lines are ignored and generally whitespace is
insignificant except within quoted values and in the payloads for `cert`.  Comment lines start with
`#` (with no leading whitespace) and go until EOL.  Comments should appear only on lines by
themselves.

Annotated grammar:
```
    Program ::= Statements End
      -- A program is a sequence of statements followed by an End line

    End ::= "end" EOL

    Statement ::= Clear | Version | Save | Set | Cert

    Clear ::= "clear" EOL
      -- This resets all variables to their defaults, most of them empty.

    Version ::= "version" Major-dot-Minor-dot-Bugfix EOL
      -- This optional statement states the version of the firmware that the
      -- configuration file was written for.

    Save ::= "save" EOL
      -- This saves all variables to nonvolatile storage.  Usually this comes
	  -- right before the End line; it can be omitted for testing purposes.

    Set ::= "set" Variable Value EOL
      -- This assigns Value to Variable
      -- Value is a string of non-whitespace characters, or a quoted string

    Cert ::= "cert" Cert-name EOL Text-lines
      -- This defines a multi-line text variable
      -- The first payload line must start with the usual "-----BEGIN ..."
	  -- The last payload line must end with with the usual "-----END ..."
	  -- No blank lines or comments may appear after the "cert" line until
	  -- after the last payload line.
```


## Re-provisioning

It's important not to proliferate device IDs and certs too much, so save the config file and other
key files for each device for use during future re-provisioning, should it become necessary.  See
also `aws-iot-backend/README.md` about this.


## Bulk provisioning (sketch; not implemented, but not hard)

Note that the above method using `curl` to post text files is scriptable.  The script could be given
the name of the device and its network and IP address, would contact AWS to generate the necessary
files, would create a configuration, and would upload it.  The thing that's hardest to script is
probably the connection to the device's access point.

Commit message:

Add a 'this is not the document youre looking for' comment

CONFIG.md, after:

-*- fill-column: 100 -*-

# Factory provisioning

This document is only about "factory provisioning" the SnappySense devices - installing the device
ID, certificates and keys, and so on.  This is typically done by a device developer.

For end user configuration of WiFi network names and data of that type, see
[firmware-arduino/MANUAL.md](firmware-arduino/MANUAL.md).

## Individual factory provisioning

In "individual factory provisioning mode" the SnappySense device is brought up in "access point
mode" (AP mode) as described in [../firmware-arduino/MANUAL.md](../firmware-arduino/MANUAL.md),
offering a WiFi access point with a name advertised on its screen (the AP name is generated randomly
if none has been cconfigured).  The screen will also show an IP address.

### Factory config query

To query the device configuration, run

```
   curl http://192.168.a.b/show
```

Passwords are represented by their first letter and certificates by their first line.

### Factory config update

To configure the device, run

```
   curl -i --data-binary @snp_x_y_no_z.cfg http://192.168.a.b/config
```

where `snp_x_y_no_z.cfg` is the name of the configuration file for the device whose name is
`snp_x_y_no_z`, see `aws-iot-backend/README.md`, and `192.168.a.b` is the IP address printed on the
device screen.

The `-i` argument to `curl` ensures that the server response is shown.  For a successful upload, the
response is a 200 header.  Otherwise it is a 405 header with an error message pinpointing the
problem.  An error message will also be shown on the device screen.

To check that the device has been configured properly you can also use the `/show` command as
outlined above while still connected to the AP.

### Config syntax

The syntax of the config file is as follows.  (An example configuration file is also in
`firmware-arduino/src/configuration_template.txt`, and it will be useful to read
`aws-iot-backend/README.md` about how to obtain the device identity and certficiates.)

The config file has a line-oriented syntax.  Blank lines are ignored and generally whitespace is
insignificant except within quoted values and in the payloads for `cert`.  Comment lines start with
`#` (with no leading whitespace) and go until EOL.  Comments should appear only on lines by
themselves.

Annotated grammar:
```
    Program ::= Statements End
      -- A program is a sequence of statements followed by an End line

    End ::= "end" EOL

    Statement ::= Clear | Version | Save | Set | Cert

    Clear ::= "clear" EOL
      -- This resets all variables to their defaults, most of them empty.

    Version ::= "version" Major-dot-Minor-dot-Bugfix EOL
      -- This optional statement states the version of the firmware that the
      -- configuration file was written for.

    Save ::= "save" EOL
      -- This saves all variables to nonvolatile storage.  Usually this comes
	  -- right before the End line; it can be omitted for testing purposes.

    Set ::= "set" Variable Value EOL
      -- This assigns Value to Variable
      -- Value is a string of non-whitespace characters, or a quoted string

    Cert ::= "cert" Cert-name EOL Text-lines
      -- This defines a multi-line text variable
      -- The first payload line must start with the usual "-----BEGIN ..."
	  -- The last payload line must end with with the usual "-----END ..."
	  -- No blank lines or comments may appear after the "cert" line until
	  -- after the last payload line.
```


## Re-provisioning

It's important not to proliferate device IDs and certs too much, so save the config file and other
key files for each device for use during future re-provisioning, should it become necessary.  See
also `aws-iot-backend/README.md` about this.


## Bulk provisioning (sketch; not implemented, but not hard)

Note that the above method using `curl` to post text files is scriptable.  The script could be given
the name of the device and its network and IP address, would contact AWS to generate the necessary
files, would create a configuration, and would upload it.  The thing that's hardest to script is
probably the connection to the device's access point.
