README.md, before:

# SnappySense

[This repo](https://github.com/knowit/snappysense) holds the hardware designs, firmware source code, and design documents for KnowIt ObjectNet's _SnappySense_ environmental sensor device.

The v1.0.0 device has an esp32 MoC and a number of environmental sensors (temperature, humidity, air quality, and other things - see `src/sensor.h`, as well as a small OLED display.

The v1.1.0 device additionally has a small speaker.

The v1 firmware has FreeRTOS at the base and the Arduino framework layered on top and is written in C++.

## Design documents

The user experience during setup and use is outlined in `UX.md`.

Firmware architecture is documented at the beginning of `src/main.cpp`, with pointers to other files.

Device architecture, as seen by software (peripheral addresses, MCU pins, etc), is documented in `src/device.cpp`.

## Device schematics and data sheets

Device schematics and data sheets will appear in this repo eventually (Issue #31).

## Firmware source code and development

We use Visual Studio Code for the development environment.  Before you build the first time, you will need to install the PlatformIO extension in Visual Studio Code, see platformio.org for pointers.

Coding standards are documented at the beginning of `src/main.h`.

### Developer builds

Source code is in `src/`, start with `src/main.cpp` and `src/main.h`.

Enable `DEVELOPER` in `src/main.h` to make it easier to develop and test.

Make a copy of `src/development_config_template.txt` as `src/development_config.h` and make modifications in that copy for your local setup, as this file is required to provide default settings.

### Release builds

To make a release build:
* Be sure to disable `DEVELOPMENT` in `src/main.h`.
* Adjust any other switches in `src/main.h` that might feel like development-only.
* Pay attention to warnings during build, as some switches that should not be on during release cause warnings to be printed if they are enabled.

Commit message:

Fix #6 - add some requirements documentation

README.md, after:

# SnappySense

[This repo](https://github.com/knowit/snappysense) holds the hardware designs, firmware source code, and design documents for KnowIt ObjectNet's _SnappySense_ environmental sensor device.  See `BACKGROUND.md` for background, requirements, and that type of discussion.

The v1.0.0 device has an esp32 MoC and a number of environmental sensors (temperature, humidity, air quality, and other things - see `src/sensor.h`, as well as a small OLED display.

The v1.1.0 device additionally has a small speaker.

The v1 firmware has FreeRTOS at the base and the Arduino framework layered on top and is written in C++.

## Design documents

The user experience during setup and use is outlined in `UX.md`.

Firmware architecture is documented at the beginning of `src/main.cpp`, with pointers to other files.

Device architecture, as seen by software (peripheral addresses, MCU pins, etc), is documented in `src/device.cpp`.

## Device schematics and data sheets

Device schematics and data sheets will appear in this repo eventually (Issue #31).

## Firmware source code and development

We use Visual Studio Code for the development environment.  Before you build the first time, you will need to install the PlatformIO extension in Visual Studio Code, see platformio.org for pointers.

Coding standards are documented at the beginning of `src/main.h`.

### Developer builds

Source code is in `src/`, start with `src/main.cpp` and `src/main.h`.

Enable `DEVELOPER` in `src/main.h` to make it easier to develop and test.

Make a copy of `src/development_config_template.txt` as `src/development_config.h` and make modifications in that copy for your local setup, as this file is required to provide default settings.

### Release builds

To make a release build:
* Be sure to disable `DEVELOPMENT` in `src/main.h`.
* Adjust any other switches in `src/main.h` that might feel like development-only.
* Pay attention to warnings during build, as some switches that should not be on during release cause warnings to be printed if they are enabled.
